Modular Prosthetic Limb and Super Muscles
27th December 2013

The Modular Prosthetic Limb, developed by John Hopkins University really astounds me. It certainly is a device of the future, and has the functionality nearly replicating that of a hand and arm. Now , there are a few limitations to the device, such as latency, that will need to be addressed in order for it to surpass the human arm, but this device certainly is a step in the right direction.

Unfortunately, most of the devices I've come across that are designed to be used as prosthetic devices are controlled using a muscles such as those in the upper arm change preset grip patterns. The limitations of this method are quickly revealed once you realize that you have to start toggling through options before you can select a specific preset pattern that may not even be fine-tuned enough for you to manipulate an object in the desired way. How can you flip your phone over in one hand with a toggle method? Obviously, this is only a temporary solution that hopefully will now be phased out with devices such as this.

This device uses a brain-computer interface directly connected to the motor-control section of the brain, which allows for a diverse set of movements not confined to a selection of grip patterns. Additionally, and the part that really excited me, is that this device has been said to offer the sensation of touch by connecting sensors on the hand to relative locations in the brain. Now, the dynamic applicability of both the movement and touch sensations haven't had much testing, but the concept itself is enough to start making headlines. The prosthesis offers over 20 degrees of movement, many of which haven't been seen yet in similar devices, such as the ability to spread apart your fingers. These little nuances are key in replicating the functionality of the arm.

While the usage of the device itself is exciting for those who have lost functionality in their limbs, in the scope of transhumanism, it becomes even more exciting. How much longer until we will have a hand with flexibility exceeding that of human hands? What about devices that are more sensitive than our current fingertips allow? We will have to expand our minds as well to process these new inputs, but once it's in place, it will allow for a much wider and stronger sense of ability than expressed before.

A less extreme solution to upgrading your arms than simply amputating them to replace them with robotic replacements would be to enhance natural biology with artificial implants. The Laurence Berkley National Laboratory has developed a muscle-like substance that is capable of 1000 times the relative strength compared to our muscle tissues. [Link to article] Interlacing natural muscles with these additional fibers could augment our strength beyond human limitations. This is on the lower and more physical applications of transhumanism, but still intriguing nonetheless. Perhaps one day sights like these won't be so uncommon.

CATEGORIES: Future Tech, Future Speculation, Transhumanism, Cool Science, Ancient Posts
