Global Internet Access
5th June 2014

We live in the middle ground between future and past. Obviously, this statement is a bit vague, so let me clarify what I mean; in the past, communication technology was in a state of relative penury to today. Whether we were using  letters, Morse code, telephones, radio, or even television, the quality and speed of transmission of information was of comparatively negligible quality. Each had their downfalls, and while the latter technologies replaced many of the inefficiencies of previous ones, they still withheld nowhere near the same level of quality or speed that the internet espouses today.

Letters were the beginning; they took weeks or even months to travel the course to where they needed to go. This inherent limitation resulted in a lack of fluid conversation, and frequently large blocks of text were interchanged at a very slow pace. Morse code, although instantaneous in a way, required decoding, in a process that took several minutes for a statement no longer than this sentence. Telephone allowed for quick and instantaneous communication, but it was only between two people, and it was only audio that was transmitted. Radio allowed the immediate dissemination of large amounts of information, but of course it was only audible as well, with no possible way for consumers to reciprocate the communication. Television allowed for the first true large-scale spreading of visual information - but again, it was only one-way.

The internet broke down all previous barriers of communication. It combined the aspects of all previous forms of communication, and offered variations that were unimaginable to our previous ancestors. Trying to explain a Skype conference call to someone who worked with Morse code would be difficult to say the least. We have the ability to exchange visual and audible information, instantaneously, in a way that allowed for immediate interchange of information and discussion between various people simultaneously.

This isn't to say that the internet is perfect right now. We still are clueless as to how we will successfully add the ability to spread tactile information, without even going into smells, tastes, pressures, feelings, and a whole host of human information processes that are currently isolated from our range of sharing. This brings me to my second point: we are on the verge of a future of ubiquitous communication technology.

Today, we are primarily plagued by the lack of internet reception in certain areas on the planet. It's not the lack of information on the web - it's getting access to it which presents a massive engineering problem that is being worked on right this very moment. Google is working on projects like <a href="https://fiber.google.com/about/">Google Fiber</a>, which will speed up internet access to up to 1000 Mbps, or 100 times faster than what average connection speeds are today.

But this isn't the only wonder technology that is coming out of Google's deep-pockets. Through a global network of <a href="https://www.technologyreview.com/s/527831/how-google-could-disrupt-global-internet-delivery-by-satellite/">180 satellites</a>, Google plans on providing internet access worldwide. This means no more dropped service. Anywhere. Globally, people will have access to the internet, exploding this massively-capable technology into a force that every human on the planet could theoretically have access to.

The internet is expanding, and soon, people will be able to access it and utilize its power across the planet. Future expansions of our capabilities through this connectivity will have a well-established infrastructure to expand across.

CATEGORIES: Future Tech, Future Speculation, Ancient Posts
