Nanotechnology
29th December 2013

A subject that is especially interesting to me, and has extreme practical applications in transhumanism, the singularity, and artificial intelligence among a host of other things is <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nanotechnology">nanotechnology</a>. I'm pretty certain that those of you that read my blog probably have a pretty good understanding already of what nanotechnology is, and maybe even some of the massive potential applications are of this field, but I want to discuss some of the more exciting and maybe less well-known technologies that can arise from this field.

First of all, when people hear the word "nanotechnology", they often have an idea of little robots swimming around in the body, or tiny machines floating in the air that can do things together to have a macroscopic effect. While this isn't the only application of the field, it certainly has its uses. Primarily, the utilization of intelligent nanoparticles has the potential to augment reality to a very dream-like world that would seem very fluid to us. One concept of these smart particles floating in the air is something called a <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utility_fog">utility fog</a>. This would take the form of "intelligent matter", which, while having limited capabilities, would be able to take any shape, color, texture, and a wide range of densities and strengths.

These self-reconfiguring machines would have the appearance of intelligent matter. You could program it to take the shape of any item, and respond to pressures and forces. As such, it could be fundamentally useful in tracking the 3D position of any object surrounded by them, as well as creating an intricate system which would be able to detail the motions of the object to a very, very fine detail. Their real-time ability to reconfigure themselves gives them the unique trait of being interactable. Thus their incredible applications become apparent.

Now we move on to the idea of <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nanobiotechnology">bionanotechnology</a>. One of my favorite ideas relating to this field is the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Respirocyte">respirocyte</a> - an artificial replacement for the red blood cell in the body. These devices have over 200 times the efficiency of an organic red blood cell. If someone were to replace 10% of their blood with these artificial versions, they would be able to not take a breath for hours, or to run an Olympic sprint for 15 minutes on a single breath. These superhuman feats are hard to imagine outside of the realm of science fiction, yet the concept exists.

These aren't the only applications of bionanotech. Imagine a "microbivore" substitute for white blood cells and macrophages, except instead of an isolated repository of antibodies, it has every recorded genome of viruses and bacteria within its databases, able to eliminate any foreign pathogen in seconds. Illness would be eliminated much like smallpox was eradicated. Some more extreme examples really start to peak some interest in the applications of these devices.

Imagine that the nuclei of your cells were replaced by an artificial component. Unlike your organic nucleus, this counterpart would ensure any mutations were eradicated. You could reprogram your genome at any time through the internet. Hereditary diseases are eliminated. Cancer is eliminated. Any genetic ailment that you experience today would be eradicated instantly. And these are the less extreme examples of the potential of nanotech. Your cells would replicate consciously. Instead of replicating based on unreliable environment signals and hormones that can be manipulated, your cell structure could be designed consciously. Not only that, but you could immediately repurpose your cell to become a stem cell, optimized for healing.

These programmable cells would be able to replace lost limbs by consciously replicating. Scars would be nonexistent. Any damaged tissue would be repaired to optimal conditions. Brain cells could be replicated in a process of neurogenesis, crafting your brain structure to be more alert, more intelligent, while simultaneously eradicating any mental disorder on the range from Down Syndrome to non-responsive vegetables. Paralysis could be repaired as your neurons reconstruct themselves down your spinal column.

Why even stop? Nanocontructors on the scale of normal cells could augment natural cellular structure: your muscles, stronger, your bones, virtually unbreakable. Bleeding wouldn't happen; wounds would be clotted before blood had a chance to leave the body. In fact, it's likely that healing would be accelerated to a visual pace. You could even change your appearance. These nanomachines would remove cellular damage and repair tissue, inject drugs where they are needed extremely quickly. Aging would cease.

Imagine the most biologically perfect person you can imagine: the most intelligent, the strongest, the fastest. These nanobots will be able to make everyone perfect under the limitations of our own biology, and then advance us even more with substitutes that surpass our biology. We won't be completely artificial; rather we will be cyborgs. The only way to improve past this point is to remove the biological aspect, but that would no longer fall under nanobiotech.

So how do we turn these dreams into a reality? They would require the utilization of something called a "nanofactory" or a "molecular assembler". These are defined as devices able to create structures that are detailed to the atomic level. They would work through a combination of nanostructures capable of chemically manipulating large quantities of atoms into precise arrangements.

These nanofactories have the capability of making any structure you could imagine, even organic ones. We could print food that is tastier, perfectly nutritious, and completely absent of any animal cruelty. We wouldn't have to rely on the slaughter of animals, which ranges on perfectly normal to unacceptable for some. Regardless, it would be a net benefit because not many consider the killing of animals unnecessarily to be a good thing. 

We have a while to go before this technology becomes applicable, but it may just be within the realm of possibility in the next 20-30 years.However, we have technology already that is able to create structures that are too small to be seen with the human eye.

These are real structures that were made by a microscale 3D printer that works at a resolution down to about 1 µm. Although we have about 4-5 orders of magnitude to go before we can reach the detail required for precise nanotechnology, the premise is still very exciting. Given enough time, this technology will emerge, allowing for the massive-scale production of nanomachines that can format themselves into intelligent matter, or integrate themselves with our biology, turning us into superhumans.

Nanotechnology will help to liberate us from a lot of illnesses, as well as enriching our lives inside and outside of our bodies. Imagine the potential of humanity when we don't have to spend time worrying about death or disease; a time when everyone is superintelligent, allowing each individual to contribute to the world without being obstructed by the massive amount of obstacles that face us today. Truly, it's an exciting idea, and one that I look forward to working toward myself.

If you have any ideas on the potential applications of nanotechnology, please leave a comment below detailing them!

CATEGORIES: Future Tech, Future Speculation, Transhumanism, Cool Science, Ancient Posts
