Building a Brain
5th January 2014

Happy New Years! Starting off 2014, let's discuss the future of neural simulation. For quite some time now, several projects since the start of the decade have been aimed at <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_brain">recreating the human brain in a virtual environment</a>. The applications would be profound and wide reaching. Firstly, it would go a long way in objectively diagnosing and treating certain types of mental disorders. We could look directly into the brain to see what goes wrong when certain cognitive diseases take hold. We could also work on new drugs that could be virtually tested to see a close approximation of the effects before ever having to do clinical trials.

The <a href="https://www.humanbrainproject.eu/">Human Brain Project</a> recently received one billion dollars to attempt to simulate the human brain. These resources will be paramount in funding the development of a simulation on a supercomputer that could be comparable to the human brain. It's exciting stuff, and their deadlines fall within a decade, which is even more exciting. Before we hit 2025, it is more likely than not that we will have the physiological portion of the brain simulated perfectly, with the only part remaining in refining behavioral characteristics and understanding the data that is produced by the machine.

Perhaps the most important application of an artificial brain would be the potential merging of human behavioral and cognitive abilities with the vast storage and computational abilities of machines. This would be achieved through the design of processors and nodes between computational pieces becoming more organically connected. This, as I previously mentioned, would quickly result in the emergence of strong AI.

How far of a leap is it to say that we will have artificial intelligence by 2030? The comprehensive knowledge of the brain which is predicted to be unveiled before 2025, combined with exponentially increasing computational power is only guaranteed to result in, at the very least, computer systems that are very unique and very interesting to study. Artificial intelligence is possible, and it's likely to come much sooner than you think.

This simulated brain has a few issues that must be addressed before it reaches its full potential applications. Primarily, the behavior nuances of humans are cultured and carefully sculpted from an entire childhood of living in a society. A neuronal network produces no more than electric noise if the connections aren't carefully constructed from a lifetime of experiences. Secondly, the brain simulation will require a computer <a href="https://singularityhub.com/2012/11/01/the-race-to-a-billion-billion-operations-per-second-an-exaflop-by-2018/">33 times more powerful</a> than today's top super computer if it is to be fully simulated. While these seems to be a massive goal, only a few years ago this number was at a thousand. The <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore's_law">exponential progression</a> of technology has already cut that requirement by almost 2 orders of magnitude. It won't take incredibly long to have the computing capabilities of the brain.

If we want to understand how the human brain works, looking into our evolutionary history is a good place to start. How did our brains develop?

If we take a look at our evolutionary history, a pattern begins to emerge. Along the path of neuronal expansion, new parts of the brain were developed, then expanded in order to be capable of higher level computations. The brain is an incredibly durable machine for the environments it is placed it. It is built to last for a lifetime, and it certainly performs that function very well; however it isn't perfect. We still contract problems with mental functioning and physiological problems in the brain that cannot be naturally repaired. This is where the science to simulate the brain becomes useful. It will allow us a wider view of how the brain functions and what to do when things go wrong.

Ultimately, it will be a tool useful for diagnosing the weaknesses of the brain, and then subsequently utilizing it's strengths in computational technologies. Of course the behavioral instances of humanity will take longer to simulate, but the HBP is a promising tool that may result in a strong AI that will profoundly change the way that the world works, much like the computer originally did from the 1950's to today.

CATEGORIES: Future Tech, Future Speculation, Transhumanism, Artificial Intelligence, Cool Science, Ancient Posts
