Nootropics and tDCS
8th January 2014

A <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nootropic">nootropic</a> is a drug that is specifically designed to increase mental performance through things like increased attention, neural plasticity, and memory. In the past, chemical nootropics have been used to help children with diseases such as ADD or ADHD to focus on specific tasks whereas normally they would be unable to function appropriately. Recently, however, these drugs have been researched as potential cognitive enhancers, separated from the disease-treating mentality that they often were confined to previously.

The attraction of nootropics is rather clear. Often times they improve memory function, focus, and the ability to think while they produce very few, rare side effects. These vary from person to person based on individual psychology, but there are a variety of drugs that can be tested to see which ones work better for which person. Someone more active and hyper-focused may have difficulty changing their line of thought when taking drugs that increase focus. As such, they may be more inclined to take something that improves memory. The different effect of a variety of drugs have applicability to a wide range of people, and thus it's an interesting proposition to look into.

Looking at the effects of these different drugs sometimes looks like picking out superpowers (<a href="https://drugs-forum.com/threads/list-of-nootropics-and-their-effects-user-complied.80561/#ixzz2pmgBYHOK">Source</a>):

Adrafinil (Olmifiron) - a drug with unique properties, which also acts as a mild stimulant 
Aniracetam - a commonly used derivative of piracetam, considered more powerful 
Carphedon -a derivative of the Nootropic piracetam. Increases physical stamina and cold tolerance in addition to its mental benefits 
Choline - precursor to acetlycholine, often taken with piracetam 
DMAE - precursor of acetylcholine, anti-depressant, used to treat ADD/ADHD 
Galantamine - drug used to treat mild Alzheimer’s Disease, is used off label as an aid for lucid dreaming 
Huperzine A - a natural botanical that has been shown to have neuroprotective properties in Chinese clinical trials 
Hydergine - popular drug with a large variety of nootropic benefits 
Inositol - a sugar which has anti-anxiety effects 
Kava kava - roots of the kava plant, have been shown to have anti-anxiety properties 
L-DOPA - amino acid naturally found in food, converted to dopamine in the body, treats Parkinson’s disease and is an anti-depressant 
Lecithin - group of fatty substances which can be found in some organic tissues, precursor to acetlycholine 
Lemon Balm - herb with anti-depressant properties 
Modafinil (Provogil) - drug similar to Adrafinil that is more powerful and has some different properties 
Niacin - vitamin which has been shown to be a very powerful anti-anxiety treatment 
Nicergoline - drug mainly used to treat dementia, but which has also been found to improve clarity of thought, memory, and vigilance 
Oxiracetam - member of the racetam family of Nootropics, more powerful than piracetam, improves a variety of cognitive functions 
Passion Flower - group of plants commonly used to treat depression, has good synergy with other supplements 
Phenibut - a natural variation on the neurotransmitter GABA 
Piracetam - the most common Nootropic, provides a wide variety of benefits and has good synergy with other Nootropic 
Rhodiola Rosea - herb which promotes mental energy and stamina, while also brightening mood 
Selegiline - a drug used to treat depression, Parkinson’s disease, and senile dementia 
St. John’s Wort - herb which has been proven suitable for treating mild depression 
Theanine - amino acid typically found in tea, reduces stress, can cause relaxation, and improves mental ability when taken with caffeine 
Tianeptine (Stablon) - a drug which treats depression and improves mental function, classified as an SSRE 
Tryptophan - amino acid which is standard in the human diet, increases serotonin levels in the brain and can be used as a sleep aid 
Tyrosine - amino acid used by cells to create proteins, helps during periods of stress, cold, and prolonged sleep deprevation 
Vitamin B5 - helps convert choline into acetlycholine, helps improve physical and mental stamina

Of course, each individual drug has its own potential side-effects and downfalls, and mixing these without caution is sure to cause some undesired problems. Nevertheless, the concept provides a fascinating idea to anyone who may be interested in boosting their own mental performance temporarily beyond what they normally experience. I'm personally interested in taking aniracetam because it seems to have the least risk for the large boost it offers.

I'd also like to go over a device called <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transcranial_direct-current_stimulation">Transcranial Direct-Current Stimulation (tDCS)</a>. The device passes a small voltage through the head via a headset. The current increases neuron plasticity and thus allows for quicker neuronal connections to be formed. The result is an effect that can nearly double the learning ability of any subject. Depending on where the brain is stimulated, the device can be used to enhance language, mathematical ability, attention span, problem solving, memory, and coordination.

The short term effects have an increasingly large amount of research looking into the benefits of the device. So far, no long-lasting negativities have been recorded, and side-effects are limited and not dangerous. The long term effects are less well-researched, but preliminary clinical trials suggest the effect is positive as well. For biohackers, this device is a dream-come-true.

A $250 device marketed as a gaming device has recently entered the market, called <a href="http://foc.us/">foc.us</a>. It provides a small 2.0 mA current through the brain, increasing neural plasticity.

This device was the first commercial application of the tDCS that I could find. It's cheap, effective, and a great way to start off biohacking.

An interesting idea emerges if we consider the stacking of nootropics with tDCS. Would they amplify each other's effects, or just give you a headache? Once I have the ability to test these methods for myself, I'm interested to see the end result. If anyone's tried stacking nootropics and the tDCS, please elaborate on how it was. The future applications of these two emerging technologies is an interesting prospect, and I look forward to updating on their progress.

CATEGORIES: Future Tech, Future Speculation, Transhumanism, Cool Science, Ancient Posts
